#labels Featured
=Change Log=

===Version 2.2.0 Beta===

Directly thrown IllegalArgumentException now counts as an assumption violation. If it is thrown indirectly, it then counts as requirement violation.

Improved combinatoric engine. If a,b,c are in the testing-scope before we can only generate permutations of a,b,c; not we can also generate products over a,b,c. That is, (a,a,c) for example can now be generated.

The manual is improved with examples of custom InterfaceMap and BaseDomain.

Various small fixes.

The 2.2 line is still maintained Beta because we are still working on it. In principle we only work on adding features; but it does make 2.2 at the moment still a bit unstable.



===Version 2.1.4.5===

Fixing compatibility problem with Java 1.5 (that was present in some of the previous versions).

Adding explicit serial numbers for the serialization of test-sequences. This may cause this new version to refuse loading saved test-sequences from earlier version; but I don't expect anyone will actually experience this problem.

===Version 2.1.4.4===

Bug fixes, among other the crash when T2 was asked to generate certain primitive types (forgot to cover them in the basedomain). Thanks to newportmeistes.

The engine is tweaked a bit to allow a custom generator to generate nulls for boxing types (e.g. Integer). Thanks to Christiaan Hees.

===Version 2.1.4.1===

Minor bug fix.

===Version 2.1.4===

Search mode is added! 

===Version 2.1.3===

Turning off the printing of static fields when showing an object's state.

===Version 2.1.2===

Small fixes. Turning off MerseneTwister random generator untill I figured out why it doesn't work on linux.

===Version 2.1.1===

Adding some small fixes to 2.1.